---
title: are burn downs pointless?
---

are burn downs pointless? I find myself asking this question often. burn down charts are associated with the way a teams story points are completed in a given sprint or project. Throughout my career, I have been asked, typically from non-development people, for a burn down chart for project x. This always feels wrong. Is the burn down chart the proper way to discuss this? I understand the ask -- the people that ask for these want to see progress. What's a better way to track the work down on a project than a chart showing work lower over time? So what's the problem with this? The engineers estimated. They calculated their velocity. Given that data, this project will be done in x sprints, right? At least, that's what everyone that discusses burn downs and velocity and story points say. On the surface, this sounds great. What's the problem then? The first and easiest argument against it is scope creep. All projects, even those with large requirements documents, change over time. This can be based on feedback from customers. Or feedback from UX. Or just finding out that something is much harder than expected. All of this causes that pretty graph to get screwed up. Maybe it looks like a plateua, of maybe it shows peeks. It also means that the project will take longer than the original estimate. This should be expected of course, especially if you are agile as you may claim. Of course this can cause frustration with the people that like their pretty charts. This reason is probably the least-important argument, as this is an argument that happens in all software projects.


Another issue is that it is based on story points. I have always thought of story points as a measure of complexity. It's a way for engineers on a team to determine how hard certain features will be to implement. A quick vote provides an easy way to see if everyone is on the same page. If there is a difference, then it opens up the discussion as each engineer makes their case. This helps uncover unexpected issues, or different ideas on implementations. That conversation is the point of the stories, not how to track work. This of course has then been taken into different contexts -- now that we know these points, we can come up with a calculation for how long it will take the work to complete. Great! But does that tell us that we're building the right thing?

That leads to the bigger issue -- how are you measuring that you are building the right thing? This is often ignore when in the discussions of story points. There is no indicator that the work being done is the right work to complete. And, most of the time, this is not even tracked. Were all of those features/stories/tasks actually important? is their delivery needed? And is it the right time? Maybe more importantly, is there something more important? Also, is there any post-review that the work completed was worthwhile? How is the outcome measured? Was the flow and order correct? What could have been better? These are a lot of the questions that bother me when discussing "burn down charts" and "velocity". 
